# Page 1

Enhanced Transformer architecture for
in-context learning of dynamical systems
Matteo Rufolo, Dario Piga, Gabriele Maroni, Marco Forgione ∗
October 2024
Abstract
Recently introduced by some of the authors, the in-context identifi-
cation paradigm aims at estimating, offline and based on synthetic data,
a meta-model that describes the behavior of a whole class of systems.
Once trained, this meta-model is fed with an observed input/output se-
quence (context) generated by a real system to predict its behavior in
a zero-shot learning fashion. In this paper, we enhance the original
meta-modeling framework through three key innovations: by formulat-
ingthelearningtaskwithinaprobabilisticframework;bymanagingnon-
contiguouscontextandquerywindows;andbyadoptingrecurrentpatch-
ing to effectively handle long context sequences. The efficacy of these
modifications is demonstrated through a numerical example focusing on
theWiener-Hammersteinsystemclass,highlightingthemodel’senhanced
performance and scalability.
1 Introduction
In system identification (SYSID), the primary objective is to model dynamical
systems, leveraging both measured input-output trajectories and prior knowl-
edge of the system’s dynamics. The SYSID setting is thus closely related to
supervised machine learning (ML), with a specific focus on dynamical systems.
Due to this similarity, machine-learning techniques have become increasingly
popular over the years for estimating dynamical systems through, e.g., neural
network architectures [1, 2, 3] and kernel-based methods [4, 5].
Despite their success, standard supervised learning approaches do not ex-
ploittheinsightthatcouldbegainedbyrepeatedlyidentifyingsimilarsystems.
Whilehumansimproveatsolvingrelatedtasks,traditionalML(andSYSID)al-
gorithms rely on fixed, predefined procedures that are applied uniformly across
different datasets.
Theconceptoflearningtolearn,ormeta-learning,wasintroducedinthelate
eighties by the pioneering work [6] to overcome this limitation and is gaining
∗The authors are with SUPSI, IDSIA, Lugano, 6962, Switzerland. e-mails:
name.surname@supsi.ch
1
4202
tcO
4
]GL.sc[
1v19230.0142:viXra

---

# Page 2

increasing attention, see [7] for a recent survey. In the meta-learning settings,
a series of related tasks are presented to an agent which adapts its behavior
to act optimally with respect to that class of tasks. In the context of SYSID,
the algorithmic agent receives streams of input/output datasets from a class of
dynamical systems, and self-tune its behavior to make optimal predictions for
those systems [8, 9, 10].
The meta-model presented by some of the authors in [11] generates multi-
step-ahead predictions over a class of dynamical systems. It receives as input a
context of past input/output samples from a system, together with the future
query input trajectory, and directly generates an estimate of the correspond-
ing future outputs. Training is carried out in a supervised learning manner
over a (potentially infinite) stream of synthetic datasets obtained by processing
randomly-generated input signals through systems randomly sampled from the
class of interest.
To address the meta-modeling task across a broad range of systems, the
meta-model must be able to extract relevant knowledge from the context data.
Essentially, the meta-model should function as a SYSID algorithm, learning
system-specific models from the context data and leveraging this information
to solve the multi-step-ahead simulation task for the given query input. The
peculiar capability of meta-models to behave like learning algorithms is often
referred to as in-context learning [12].
In [11], the meta-model was parameterized as an encoder-decoder Trans-
former, leveragingthestrongin-contextlearningcapabilitiespreviouslydemon-
stratedbythisarchitectureinthefieldofnaturallanguageprocessing[13]. How-
ever, although the Transformers achieved promising results for meta-modeling
of dynamical systems, it also has inherent limitations that hinder its potential
across common SYSID scenarios. In this paper, we modify the architecture
in [11] to address some of the limitations discussed below.
A well-known critical aspect of Transformers is the computational complex-
ity of their key attention mechanism, which grows quadratically with the se-
quence length. In [11], this constrained the context sequence to a few hun-
dred time steps, which is arguably shorter than a typical SYSID dataset. This
computational issue has been extensively analyzed in recent literature, with
several attempts proposed to mitigate it. Certain approaches aim at approxi-
mating attention with simplified mechanisms that achieve comparable results,
but with reduced computational complexity [14, 15, 16]. Other contributions
adopt a hierarchical processing pattern where sequences are first divided into
sub-sequences denoted as patches, that are processed individually by a patching
network which reduces their time dimensionality. The Transformer eventually
processes the resulting (shorter) sequence of patch embeddings, instead of the
raw samples [17, 18]. In this paper, we address the context length limitation
with a patch-based approach inspired by [18], but utilizing a Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) [19] as patching network instead of a linear layer.
Anotherlimitationsof[11]isthatthemeta-model’soutputconsistsofpoint
estimates, which do not convey information about predictive uncertainty. We
address this issue by formulating the learning problem in a probabilistic setting
2

---

# Page 3

and by estimating the conditional distribution of the query output given the
observed context and the query input.
Finally, [11] assumed contiguous context and query windows. The task was
formalized as a time series forecasting problem, where the objective is to guess
the future values of the time series, given the past observations and future in-
puts. However,SYSIDgenerallyaimsatestimatingsimulationmodels,thatcan
describe systems starting from arbitrary initial conditions. To align with the
SYSIDsetting,wemodifythetaskandalsoprovidethefirstinput/outputsam-
ples of the query segment to the meta-model. These samples convey the initial
condition information for the query sequence, thus allowing it to be detached
from the context.
Therestofthepaperisorganizedasfollows. Section2describestheproblem
setting, analyzing in detail the meta-modeling framework in [11] and the lim-
itations of the architecture introduced in that work. The salient architectural
changes introduced in this paper to overcome these limitations are described
in 3. A numerical example is illustrated in Section 4 to demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of the proposed methodology. Conclusions and the direction for future
studies are discussed in the Section 5.
2 Problem description
In [11], an in-context parametric learner M , referred to as meta-model, has
ϕ
beenintroducedtodescribeaclassofdynamicalsystems. Themeta-modelM ,
ϕ
withtunableparametersϕ,istrainedona“meta-dataset”. Todefinethe“meta-
dataset”,twoprobabilitydistributions,oneoverdynamicalsystemsandoneover
input signals, are introduced. By sampling from these two distributions, it is
possible to generate a sequence of systems and inputs that, together with the
corresponding outputs, result in “usual” input/output datasets. This leads to
a potentially infinite stream of datasets {D(i) = (u(i) ,y(i) ), i = 1,2,...,∞}
1:N 1:N
with u(i) ∈ Rnu and y(i) ∈ Rny, each sampled from the dataset distribution
k k
p(D) induced by randomly sampling systems and inputs. The datasets D(i) are
all different, but they are drawn from the same probability distribution, so it is
possible to transfer the learned knowledge from one realization to another.
EachdatasetrealizationD(i) issplitintoaninitialcontext segmentoflength
m and a contiguous query segment of length N −m. The meta-model M is
ϕ
trained to reconstruct the query output y(i) from the query input u(i)
m+1:N m+1:N
and the input/output context (u(i) ,y(i) ), namely:
1:m 1:m
yˆ(i) =M (u(i) ,u(i) ,y(i) ), (1)
m+1:N ϕ m+1:N 1:m 1:m
where yˆ(i) represents the estimate of the output y(i) .
m+1:N m+1:N
Training is performed in a supervised manner, by minimizing the regression
loss
J =
1(cid:88) b (cid:13)
(cid:13)y(i) −M (u(i) ,u(i) ,y(i) )
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
2
, (2)
b (cid:13) m+1:N ϕ m+1:N 1:m 1:m (cid:13)
i=1
3

---

# Page 4

wherebdenotestheminibatchsize,namelythenumberofdatasetsrandomlyex-
tractedateachiterationofgradient-basedoptimization. Notethateachdataset
D(i) is associated to a different dynamical system S(i), with i=1,...,b.
Intuitively, the meta-model M is expected to “understand” the dynamics
ϕ
of system S(i) from the context data (u(i) ,y(i) ) and to use this knowledge
1:m 1:m
to generate output predictions yˆ(i) in the query segment. Eventually, the
m+1:N
trained meta-model M , will be able to generate multi-step-ahead predictions
ϕ
for a new system S given an input/output sequence (u ,y ) and the query
1:m 1:m
input u , without the need of estimating a model for that system. It is
m+1:N
worth remarking that, although training is done offline based on potentially
synthetic data generated in simulation, the trained meta-model is supposed to
be applied online to measured data from a real system.
In [11], an encoder-decoder Transformer architecture [20] is used as meta-
model. The input/output context data (u ,y ) are processed by the en-
1:m 1:m
coder, which produces a real-valued sequence ζ
1:m
, ζ
i
∈ Rdmodel. Then, the
decoder generates output predictions yˆ by processing the query input
m+1:N
u causally in time through masked self-attention, and integrating the en-
m+1:N
coder’s output ζ through cross-attention. Basically, the encoder output ζ
1:m 1:m
provides the decoder with the required information about the underlying dy-
namics,anditcouldbeinterpretedasanimplicitrepresentation(thus,amodel)
ofthesystem. Foravisualrepresentationofthisarchitecture, seeFig.2in[11].
Thecontributionin[11]hassomelimitations,strictlyrelatedwiththechosen
architecture:
L1: The meta-model only provides point estimates of the future outputs, in-
stead of a probabilistic distribution that could inform on predictive un-
certainty.
L2: The context and query segments are required to be contiguous, according
to a time series forecasting framework. However, in SYSID, one usually
seeks simulation model that can provide future predictions for arbitrary
initial conditions.
L3: The multi-head attention layers in the Transformer’s encoder has a com-
putationalcomplexitythatscalesquadraticallywithrespecttothelength
of the context. This limits the length of the context sequence (roughly,
order of magnitude of 1000 samples when training on a single GPU).
Inthispaper,weaimtoovercometheselimitations. Specifically: L1istack-
led by formulating the learning problem in a probabilistic setting; L2 through
a modification of the architecture that allows the decoder to process input and
output samples previous to the query as initial conditions; and L3 by dividing
the context sequence into patches.
4

---

# Page 5

Figure1: FinalTransformerarchitecturetohandleprobabilisticprediction(top
right: decoder’s output is a sequence of mean and standard deviation values);
non-contiguous context and query (bottom right: initial input/output values
of the query fed to the decoder); long context sequences (bottom left: context
sequence split into patches and processed by an RNN).
3 Advancing the Transformer Architecture
The Transformer architecture in [11] has been extended to address the three
limitationspreviouslymentioned. Inthenextparagraphs,wewillsystematically
addresseachlimitation,detailingthespecificmodificationsmadetotheoriginal
architecture. We anticipate the final extended architecture in Fig. 1, with the
following main changes:
• to address L1, we modify the final output layer to provide both the mean
and the standard deviation of the predicted output samples;
• to address L2, we introduce an additional layer before the decoder to
handle arbitrary initial conditions of the query sequence;
• to address L3, we split the context sequence into patches, which are in-
dividually processed by a RNN before being fed into the multi-attention
blocks of the Transformer’s encode.
3.1 Learning Probability Distributions
To formulate the learning problem within a probabilistic setting, we introduce
the conditional probability distribution p(y |u ,u ,y ) of the fu-
m+1:N m+1:N 1:m 1:m
ture output sequence y , given the query input u and the context
m+1:N m+1:N
5

---

# Page 6

data u ,y . For compactness, we denote by X the conditioning variables
1:m 1:m
u ,u ,y hereafter.
m+1:N 1:m 1:m
Our goal is to approximate p(y |X) with a parametric distribution
m+1:N
q (y |X)havingfreeparametersϕ. Tothisend,weintroducetheKullback-
ϕ m+1:N
Leibler divergence KL(p∥q ) between p and q :
ϕ ϕ
(cid:20) (cid:21)
p(y |X)
KL(p∥q )=E log m+1:N . (3)
ϕ p(ym+1:N|X) q (y |X)
ϕ m+1:N
According to the maximum likelihood estimation principle, the parameters ϕ
(cid:2) (cid:3)
are chosen so as to minimize E KL(p ∥ q ) , namely the expected value
p(X) ϕ
(over the conditioning variables X) of the Kullback-Leibler divergence [21]. We
have:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
E (cid:2) KL(p∥q ) (cid:3) =E log p(y m+1:N |X)
p(X) ϕ p(D) q (y |X)
ϕ m+1:N
J(ϕ)
(cid:122) (cid:125)(cid:124) (cid:123)
=E [−logq (y |X)]+K, (4)
p(D) ϕ m+1:N
where J(ϕ) is the loss function to be minimized w.r.t. ϕ, and K is a term does
not depend on ϕ. To evaluate J(ϕ), the expectation over p(D), which is in
general analytically intractable, is replaced by a Monte Carlo estimate over b
sampled datasets:
b
J(ϕ)≈
1(cid:88)
−logq (y(i) |X(i)), (5)
b ϕ m+1:N
i=1
where y(i) and X(i),i=1,...,b are samples from p(D).
m+1:N
In practice, an iterative gradient-based algorithm is applied to minimize
J(ϕ). Each optimization iteration involves evaluating (5) over b newly sampled
datasets,computingitsgradientwithrespecttoϕ,andupdatingtheparameters
accordingly. In other words, training is performed in a (minibatch) stochastic
gradient descent fashion, where b plays the role of the minibatch size.
In this work, we model the parametric distribution q as a multivariate
ϕ
Gaussian with diagonal covariance. For the sake of exposition, we consider the
single-output case (i.e., n = 1) in the rest of this paragraph. Thus, q takes
y ϕ
form:
N
(cid:89)
q (y |X)= q (y |X) (6a)
ϕ m+1:N ϕ j
j=m+1
1
(cid:18)
−
(yj−µj(X,ϕ))2(cid:19)
q
ϕ
(y
j
|X)=
(cid:113)
e 2σj 2(X,ϕ) , (6b)
2πσ2(X,ϕ)
j
where the mean and standard deviation vectors µ , σ ∈ RN−m are
m+1:N m+1:N
functions of X and ϕ.
6

---

# Page 7

These two vectors are the output of the Transformer, when fed with the
query input u and the input/output context u ,y from a system S:
m+1:N 1:m 1:m
µ ,σ =M (u ,u ,y ). (7)
m+1:N m+1:N ϕ m+1:N 1:m 1:m
Thus,withrespectto[11],wemodifythefinallayerofthedecodertooutputthe
two vectors: µ and σ ∈ RN−m rather than providing a single point
m+1:N m+1
estimatevectoryˆ ∈RN−m,seetheupperrightblockinFig.1. Itisworth
m+1:N
remarking that the vector of means µ corresponds to the point estimate
m+1:N
yˆ already provided by the previous architecture, while σ gives new
m+1:N m+1:N
insight about the meta-model’s predictive uncertainty.
3.2 Handling arbitrary initial conditions
In order to consider distinct context and query sequences, it is necessary to
provide initial conditions along with a query input sequence. In this work, we
feedthemeta-modelwithn input-outputsamplesprecedingthequeryinputas
in
theinitialconditions. Thus,forsupervisedlearningofthismeta-modelM ,two
ϕ
input/output sequences are generated from each system S: a context sequence
(u ,y ) and a disjoint query sequence (u˜ ,y˜ ), whose initial samples
1:m 1:m 1:N 1:N
(u˜ ,y˜ ) are taken as initial conditions.
1:nin 1:nin
Then, given a query input u˜ , initial conditions (u˜ ,y˜ ), and
nin+1:N 1:nin 1:nin
context (u ,y ), the meta-model returns the mean and standard deviation
1:m 1:m
vectors µ , σ of the probability distribution of the future output
nin+1:N nin+1:N
sequence y˜ :
nin+1:N
µ ,σ =M (u˜ ,u˜ ,y˜ ,u ,y ). (8)
nin+1:N nin+1:N ϕ nin+1:N 1:nin 1:nin 1:m 1:m
Tothisend, wemodifytheTransformerarchitecturebyintroducingalinear
layerthatprocessestheinitialconditions,mappingeachtimestepfromRnu+ny
to Rdmodel. Similarly, the query input is mapped from Rnu to Rdmodel through
a separate linear layer. The corresponding output sequences are then concate-
natedtoformasinglesequenceoflengthN, whereallelementshavedimension
d . Thissequenceiscombinedwithpositionalencodingbeforebeingpassed
model
intothedecoderbackboneoftheTransformer,asshowninthelayersbeforethe
decoder in Fig. 1.
Remark 1 The length m of the input/output context sequence should be suffi-
ciently large to characterize the dynamics of the system. On the other hand, the
number n of input/output samples used as initial conditions is typically small,
in
of the order of magnitude of the number of dynamical states of the system. ■
3.3 Patching for long context sequences
In order to handle Limitation L3, and thus considering long context sequences,
weadoptapatchingapproachtailoredtothemeta-learningproblemintroduced
in Section 2, and described in the following paragraphs.
7

---

# Page 8

Figure 2: Visual representation of the implemented patching approach. For the
sake of visualization, a single-input (n = 1) single-output (n = 1) system is
u y
considered. Therefore, the context consists of an input (blu) and output (red)
sequence.
Theinput-outputcontextsequence(u ,y )isdividedintoM non-overlapping
1:m 1:m
patches1, each of length L= m and dimension n +n . The patches are then
M u y
processed by an RNN which maps each of them into a single vector of dimen-
siond . Theresultingpatchembedding sequencep isthencombinedwith
model 1:M
position encoding to account for the temporal order and then fed as input to
the encoder’s backbone (see Fig. 2). The modifications of the architecture with
respectto[11]correspondstothebottom-leftblocksinFig.1. Thus, thelength
of the sequence processed by the multi-head attention mechanism processes is
reduced by a factor L, significantly decreasing the computational burden by a
factor of O(L2).
4 Numerical Example
The presented meta-model architecture is assessed for in-context learning of
dynamical systems belonging to the Wiener-Hammerstein (WH) [22] class. For
meta-modellearning, thenegativelog-likelihood(5)isminimizedover1million
iterationsoftheAdamWalgorithm[23],withminibatchsizeb=32. Trainingis
repeated for different values of the context length m∈{400,800,16000,40000}.
AllcomputationsareperformedonaserverequippedwithanNvidiaRTX3090
GPU. For reproducibility of the results, all codes made are available in the
GitHub repository [24].
4.1 System Class and Dataset Distribution
We generate synthetic datasets from random stable WH systems having struc-
tureG −F−G ,whereF isastaticnon-linearitysandwichedbetweentwoLinear
1 2
Time-Invariant (LTI) dynamical blocks G and G . Systems are drawn from
1 2
1Forsimplicityofexposition,weassumethatmismultipleofM.
8

---

# Page 9

the same distribution considered in [11]. The discrete-time LTI blocks G ,G
1 2
are randomly chosen with order between 1 and 10. The magnitude and phase
of their poles are randomly chosen from uniform distributions in the ranges
(0.5,0.97) and (0,π/2), respectively. The non-linear block F is a feed-forward
neural network with one hidden layer; 32 hidden units; and weights randomly
generated from a Gaussian distribution with Kaiming scaling [25]. The input
signals fed to the WH systems are drawn from a standard Normal distribution.
TheWHsystemoutputisstandardizedtohavezeromeanandunitvarianceand
corruptedbyadditivewhiteGaussiannoisewithstandarddeviationσ =0.1.
noise
4.2 Transformer architecture
The chosen Transformer architecture is characterized by: n = 12 layers;
layers
d =128 hidden units; and n =4 attention heads, both in the encoder
model heads
and the decoder. The number of the initial conditions is set to n = 10 and
in
the query length to N −n =100.
in
As previously mentioned, training is performed for context length m ∈
{400,800,16000,40000}. For the sake of comparison between the proposed
patching-based approach and the non-patching method, for the shortest con-
text length m = 400 the recurrent patching approach is not implemented and
the sequence of embeddings p (with M =m) is obtained simply by process-
1:M
ingthesamplesu ,y throughalinearlayerwithn +n inputsandd
1:m 1:m u y model
outputs, as in the original work [11].
For all other context lengths, the recurrent patching approach described
in Section 3.3 has been followed with fixed embedding sequence length M =
400, and patch length L = m/M. A vanilla RNN with one hidden layer and
d = 128 hidden units is used to process the M patches, each of length
model
L. The last hidden unit of each patch is extracted and further processed by
a square linear layer of dimension d , and finally combined in the patch
model
embedding sequence p fed to the encoder backbone.2 The total number of
1:M
parameterscharacterizingtheTransformerisindependentofthecontextlength,
and it is equal to 5.54 millions in all the cases with patching. When patching
is not adopted (m = 400), the number of parameters is 5.5 millions, slightly
smaller since the RNN layer is not present.
4.3 Results
Thetestrootmeansquareerror(RMSE),traintime,andnumberofparameters
ofthedifferentmeta-modelsarereportedinTable1. Furthermore,thevalidation
RMSE over the iterations of the AdamW optimization algorithm is visualized
in Fig. 3.
The difference between the achieved RMSE and the noise floor σ =0.1
noise
consistently decreases with the context length up to m = 16000. We remark
that, although it does not result in additional improvements for the benchmark
2Moreingeneral,thenumberofhiddenunitsoftheRNNcouldbedifferentfromd .
model
Inthatthecase,thefinallinearlayerwouldnotbesquare.
9

---

# Page 10

Figure 3: Root mean square error in validation vs. training iteration number
for different context lengths m.
under consideration, the recurrent patching approach allows processing of even
longer context sequences. Indeed, we managed to train until convergence a
meta-model with context length m = 40000, thus 100 times larger than the
baseline m = 400 already demonstrated in [11]. We also note that the RMSE
of 0.128 achieved with m ≥ 16000 is rather close to the noise floor σ =0.1
noise
induced by the (unpredictable) white Gaussian noise that corrupts the system
output.
In Fig. 4, the performance of the trained meta-model is visualized. In the
left panel, the true WH outputs y˜ and the simulation errors y˜ −
nin+1:N nin+1:N
µ obtained by the Transformer trained with m = 16000 over 256 ran-
nin+1:N
domly extracted WH systems are shown. In the right panel, for a particular
WHrealization,theoutputy ,theoutputmeanµ predictedbythe
nin+1:N nin+1:N
Transformer,andthepredictionerrory˜ −µ areshown. Moreover,
nin+1:N nin+1:N
the95%credibleintervalofthepredictioncomputedasµ ±3σ is
nin+1:N nin+1:N
shown as a shaded area around the nominal Transformer prediction µ .
nin+1:N
We observe that the credible intervals effectively capture the actual predictive
uncertainty.
Table 1: Root mean square error in test, train time, and number of parameters
of the meta-models for different context lengths m.
m test RMSE train time [days] parameter count [M]
400 0.166 1.00 5.50
800 0.143 1.04 5.54
16000 0.128 1.67 5.54
40000 0.128 3.75 5.54
10

---

# Page 11

Figure4: Multi-step-aheadsimulationwithwhitenoiseinputoftheTransformer
trained with m = 16k. Results on 256 randomly sampled systems superposed
(left) and on a particular system (right). Actual output y (black), simulated
output mean µ (blue), and simulation error y−µ (red). The shaded area (light
blue) is made by ±3 standard deviations provided by the meta-model.
4.4 Out-of-distribution
To assess robustness of the trained meta-model against a shift in the input
distribution, we have generated test datasets from 256 different systems by
applying as input a pseudo random binary signal (PRBS), thus with different
characteristicswithrespecttotheinputusedformeta-modeltraining. Thecase
of context length m = 16000 is reported. Output trajectories are visualized in
Fig 5a, for all systems (left panel) and for one particular realization (right
panel). TheaverageRMSEis0.3094, about2.4xlargerthanthein-distribution
case(seeTable1). Itisinterestingtoobservethat,astheperformancedecrease,
the estimated uncertainty bands get wider.
Followingtheapproachin[26],weperformedashortfine-tuningofthemeta-
model for PRBS input over 40k iterations, corresponding to approximately 2
hours of training. Results are visualized in Fig. 5b for the same test datasets
considered in the previous paragraph. We remark that fine-tuning leads to a
significant improvement in the RMSE from 0.3094 to 0.1058 (thus very close to
the noise floor σ =0.1), along with a shrinkage of the uncertainty bands.
noise
5 Conclusions
Major modifications to the Transformer-based meta-model architecture intro-
duced in [11] for in-context system identification have been presented. Numeri-
calexperimentsshowthatusinglongercontextwindowsresultsinasubstantial
accuracyimprovement,withthetrainedmeta-modelapproachingthenoisefloor.
Furthermore, the meta-model maintains reasonable performance in the case of
out-of-distribution inputs, with prediction capabilities that can be significantly
improved through fast fine-tuning.
The statistical formulation, besides providing uncertainty quantification for
theoutputpredictions,opensupapplicationsinotherareas,suchasmeta-state
estimation[27],orinclassicalsystemidentificationtaskswherethemeta-model
canbeusedtogeneratesyntheticdataasin[28],andtheuncertaintycanbeused
to properly weight synthetic samples. This is the subject of ongoing research,
11

---

# Page 12

(a) PRBS input: simulation results on 256 randomly sam-
pled systems superposed (left) and on a particular system
(right).
(b) Fine-tuned meta-model for PRBS input: simulation re-
sults on 256 randomly sampled systems superposed (left)
and on a particular system (right).
Figure 5: Multi-step-ahead simulation. Meta-model trained with white noise
input and tested with PRBS input (top row). Meta-model fine-tuned on PRBS
input signals (bottom row). Actual output y˜(black), simulated output mean µ
(blue), and simulation error y˜−µ (red). The shaded area (light blue) is made
by ±3 standard deviation provided by the meta-model.
along with activities to further enhance the scalability and computational effi-
ciency of the approach.
References
[1] M. Forgione and D. Piga, “dynoNet: A neural network architecture for
learning dynamical systems,” International Journal of Adaptive Control
and Signal Processing, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 612–626, 2021.
[2] A. Bemporad, “Training recurrent neural networks by sequential least
squares and the alternating direction method of multipliers,” Automatica,
vol. 156, p. 111183, 2023.
[3] G. I. Beintema, M. Schoukens, and R. T´oth, “Deep subspace encoders for
nonlinear system identification,” Automatica, vol. 156, p. 111210, 2023.
[4] G. Pillonetto, F. Dinuzzo, T. Chen, G. De Nicolao, and L. Ljung, “Kernel
methodsinsystemidentification,machinelearningandfunctionestimation:
A survey,” Automatica, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 657–682, 2014.
12

---

# Page 13

[5] T. Rogers, K. Worden, and E. Cross, “On the application of gaussian pro-
cesslatentforcemodelsforjointinput-state-parameterestimation: Witha
view to bayesian operational identification,” Mechanical Systems and Sig-
nal Processing, vol. 140, p. 106580, 2020.
[6] J. Schmidhuber, “Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning, or on
learning how to learn: the meta-meta-... hook,” Ph.D. dissertation, Tech-
nische Universit¨at Mu¨nchen, 1987.
[7] T. Hospedales, A. Antoniou, P. Micaelli, and A. Storkey, “Meta-learning
in neural networks: A survey,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 5149–5169, 2021.
[8] A.Chakrabarty,G.Wichern,andC.R.Laughman,“Meta-learningofneu-
ralstate-spacemodelsusingdatafromsimilarsystems,”inWorldCongress
of the International Federation of Automatic Control (IFAC), Jul. 2023.
[9] Z.Du,H.Balim,S.Oymak,andN.Ozay,“Cantransformerslearnoptimal
filtering for unknown systems?” IEEE Control Systems Letters, vol. 7, pp.
3525–3530, 2023.
[10] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman,
D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat et al., “GPT-4 tech-
nical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[11] M. Forgione, F. Pura, and D. Piga, “From system models to class models:
An in-context learning paradigm,” IEEE Control Systems Letters, vol. 7,
pp. 3513–3518, 2023.
[12] T. B. Brown, “Language models are few-shot learners,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
[13] A.Radford,J.Wu,R.Child,D.Luan,D.Amodei,I.Sutskeveretal.,“Lan-
guage models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI blog, vol. 1,
no. 8, p. 9, 2019.
[14] I. Beltagy, M. E. Peters, and A. Cohan, “Longformer: The long-document
transformer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
[15] H. Wu, J. Xu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Autoformer: Decomposition trans-
formerswithauto-correlationforlong-termseriesforecasting,”inAdvances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, 2021.
[16] H. Zhou, S. Zhang, J. Peng, S. Zhang, J. Li, H. Xiong, and W. Zhang,
“Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series fore-
casting,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
2021.
13

---

# Page 14

[17] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Un-
terthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit,
and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image
recognition at scale,” in The Eighth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2020.
[18] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series is
worth64words: Long-termforecastingwithtransformers,”inTheEleventh
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[19] G. Pillonetto, F. Dinuzzo, T. Chen, G. De Nicolao, and L. Ljung, “Kernel
methodsinsystemidentification,machinelearningandfunctionestimation:
A survey,” Automatica, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 657–682, 2014.
[20] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L(cid:32) . Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[21] K. P. Murphy, Probabilistic machine learning: an introduction, 2022.
[22] F.GiriandE.-W.Bai,Block-orientednonlinearsystemidentification,2010,
vol. 1.
[23] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
[24] M. Rufolo and M. Forgione, “Sysid-meta-dist with patching,”
https://github.com/mattrufolo/sysid-prob-transformer, 2024.
[25] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers: Sur-
passing human-level performance on imagenet classification,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2015, pp.
1026–1034.
[26] D.Piga,F.Pura,andM.Forgione,“Ontheadaptationofin-contextlearn-
ers for system identification,” in Proceedings of the IFAC Symposium on
System Identification, 2024.
[27] R.Busetto,V.Breschi,M.Forgione,D.Piga,andS.Formentin,“In-context
learning of state estimators,” in Proceedings of the IFAC Symposium on
System Identification, 2024.
[28] D. Piga, M. Rufolo, G. Maroni, M. Mejari, and M. Forgione, “Synthetic
data generation for system identification: leveraging knowledge transfer
from similar systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05164, 2024.
14